add: amused. (#1728)
huggingface/blog: amused.md

---
title: "Welcome aMUSEd: Efficient Text-to-Image Generation"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/amused/thumbnail.png
authors:

> - user: valhalla
> - user: williamberman
> - user: sayakpaul

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- user: Isamu136
- user: valhalla
- user: williamberman
- user: sayakpaul
```

---

# Welcome aMUSEd: Efficient Text-to-Image Generation

![amused_grid](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/main_image_grid.jpeg)

We’re excited to present an efficient non-diffusion text-to-image model named **aMUSEd**. It’s called so because it’s a open reproduction of [Google's MUSE](https://muse-model.github.io/). aMUSEd’s generation quality is not the best and we’re releasing a research preview with a permissive license. 

> In contrast to the commonly used latent diffusion approach (Rombach et al. (2022)), aMUSEd employs a Masked Image Model (MIM) methodology. This not only requires fewer inference steps, as noted by Chang et al. (2023), but also enhances the model's interpretability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast to the commonly used latent diffusion approach [(Rombach et al. (2022))](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752), aMUSEd employs a Masked Image Model (MIM) methodology. This not only requires fewer inference steps, as noted by [Chang et al. (2023)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00704), but also enhances the model's interpretability.
```

> Just as MUSE, aMUSEd demonstrates an exceptional ability for style transfer using a single image, a feature explored in depth by Sohn et al. (2023). This aspect could potentially open new avenues in personalized and style-specific image generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as MUSE, aMUSEd demonstrates an exceptional ability for style transfer using a single image, a feature explored in depth by [Sohn et al. (2023)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00983). This aspect could potentially open new avenues in personalized and style-specific image generation.
```

- pass the final output to the VQGAN decoder to obtain the final image

As mentioned at the beginning, aMUSEd borrows a lot of similarities from MUSE. However, there are some notable differences:

- aMUSEd doesn’t follow a two-stage approach for predicting the final masked patches.
- Instead of using T5 for text conditioning, CLIP L/14 is used for computing the text embeddings.
- Following Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), additional conditioning, such as image size and cropping, is passed to the U-ViT. This is referred to as “micro-conditioning”.

To learn more about aMUSEd, we recommend reading the technical report here (TODO: link to the report). 

## Using aMUSEd in 🧨 diffusers

aMUSEd comes fully integrated into 🧨 diffusers. To use it, we first need to install the libraries: 

```bash
pip install -U diffusers accelerate transformers -q
```

Let’s start with text-to-image generation:

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AmusedPipeline

pipe = AmusedPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "amused/amused-512", variant="fp16", torch_dtype=torch.float16
)

> pipe.vqvae.to(torch.float32)  # vqvae is kept in fp32 for stability

Reviewer: not necessary
```suggestion
```

pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

prompt = "cowboy"
image = pipe(prompt, generator=torch.manual_seed(8)).images[0]
image
```

![text2image_512.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/text2image_512.png)

We can study how `num_inference_steps` affects the quality of the images under a fixed seed:

```python
from diffusers.utils import make_image_grid 

images = []
for step in [5, 10, 15]:
    image = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=step, generator=torch.manual_seed(8)).images[0]
    images.append(image)

grid = make_image_grid(images, rows=1, cols=3)
grid
```

![image_grid_t2i_amused.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/image_grid_t2i_amused.png)

> Crucially, because of its small size (only ~600M parameters), aMUSEd is very fast. The figure below provides a comparative study of the inference latencies of different models, including aMUSEd:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Crucially, because of its small size (only ~800M parameters, including the text encoder and VQ-GAN), aMUSEd is very fast. The figure below provides a comparative study of the inference latencies of different models, including aMUSEd:
```

<figure class="image text-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/amused_speed_comparison.png" alt="Speed Comparison">
  <figcaption>Tuples, besides the model names, have the following format: (timesteps, resolution). Benchmark conducted on A100. More details are in the technical report.</figcaption>
</figure>

As a direct byproduct of its pre-training objective, aMUSEd can do image inpainting zero-shot, unlike other models such as SDXL. 

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AmusedInpaintPipeline
from diffusers.utils import load_image
from PIL import Image

pipe = AmusedInpaintPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "amused/amused-512", variant="fp16", torch_dtype=torch.float16
)

> pipe.vqvae.to(torch.float32)  # vqvae is producing nans in fp16

Reviewer: it's not really necessaery
```suggestion
```

Author: Note that I took it from the docs which was not added by me :D

Reviewer: yeah, no worries. I just fixed it in the model card, will correct docs as well.

---
title: "Welcome aMUSEd: Efficient Text-to-Image Generation"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/amused/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: valhalla
- user: williamberman
- user: sayakpaul
---

# Welcome aMUSEd: Efficient Text-to-Image Generation

![amused_grid](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/main_image_grid.jpeg)

> We’re excited to present an efficient non-diffusion text-to-image model named **aMUSEd**. It’s called so because it’s derived from the foundational work MUSE done by Google. aMUSEd’s generation quality is not the best and we’re releasing a research preview with a permissive license. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We’re excited to present an efficient non-diffusion text-to-image model named **aMUSEd**. It’s called so because it’s inspired by the foundational (but closed-source) [MUSE project by Google](https://muse-model.github.io). aMUSEd’s is a work-in-progress that does not attempt to compete in quality with the latest text-to-image models. Today we are releasing a research preview with a permissive license to encourage community work and discussions.
```

> We’re excited to present an efficient non-diffusion text-to-image model named **aMUSEd**. It’s called so because it’s derived from the foundational work MUSE done by Google. aMUSEd’s generation quality is not the best and we’re releasing a research preview with a permissive license. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We’re excited to present an efficient non-diffusion text-to-image model named **aMUSEd**. It’s called so because it’s a open reproduction of [Google's MUSE](https://muse-model.github.io/). aMUSEd’s generation quality is not the best and we’re releasing a research preview with a permissive license. 
```

> What distinguishes aMUSEd is its remarkable efficiency, operating with only 10% of the parameters of its predecessor, MUSE, yet maintaining a focus on rapid and high-quality image generation. In contrast to the commonly used latent diffusion approach (Rombach et al. (2022)), aMUSEd employs a Masked Image Model (MIM) methodology. This not only requires fewer inference steps, as noted by Chang et al. (2023), but also enhances the model's interpretability, a crucial aspect in AI applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What distinguishes aMUSEd is its remarkable efficiency, operating with only 10% of the parameters of its predecessor, MUSE, yet maintaining a focus on rapid and high-quality image generation. In contrast to the commonly used latent diffusion approach (Rombach et al. (2022)), aMUSEd employs a Masked Image Model (MIM) methodology. This not only requires fewer inference steps, but also enhances the model's interpretability, a crucial aspect in AI applications.
```

I'd maybe avoid making it look too much like a paper in exchange for better readability.

> What distinguishes aMUSEd is its remarkable efficiency, operating with only 10% of the parameters of its predecessor, MUSE, yet maintaining a focus on rapid and high-quality image generation. In contrast to the commonly used latent diffusion approach (Rombach et al. (2022)), aMUSEd employs a Masked Image Model (MIM) methodology. This not only requires fewer inference steps, as noted by Chang et al. (2023), but also enhances the model's interpretability, a crucial aspect in AI applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In contrast to the commonly used latent diffusion approach (Rombach et al. (2022)), aMUSEd employs a Masked Image Model (MIM) methodology. This not only requires fewer inference steps, as noted by Chang et al. (2023), but also enhances the model's interpretability.
```

It's not really a follow-up model of MUSE as it's quality-wise worse. I'd maybe just delete this sentence as it sounds a bit too sensational

> Moreover, the adaptability of aMUSEd is noteworthy. The model demonstrates an exceptional ability to learn additional styles from a single image, a feature explored in depth by Sohn et al. (2023). This aspect of aMUSEd could potentially open new avenues in personalized and style-specific image generation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Just as MUSE, aMUSEd demonstrates an exceptional ability for style transfer using a single image, a feature explored in depth by Sohn et al. (2023). This aspect could potentially open new avenues in personalized and style-specific image generation.
```

In this blog post, we will give you some internals of aMUSEd, show how you can use it for different tasks, including text-to-image, and show how to fine-tune it. Along the way, we will provide all the important resources related to aMUSEd, including its training code. Let’s get started 🚀

## Table of contents

* [How does it work?](#how-does-it-work)
* [Using in `diffusers`](#using-amused-in-🧨-diffusers)
* [Fine-tuning aMUSEd](#fine-tuning-amused)
* [Limitations](#limitations)
* [Resources](#resources)

## How does it work?

aMUSEd is based on ***Masked Image Modeling***. It makes for a compelling use case for the community to explore components that are known to work in language modeling in the context of image generation. 

The figure below presents a pictorial overview of how aMUSEd works. 

![amused_architecture](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/amused_architecture.png)

> 

Reviewer 2: I find the figure a bit difficult to follow. During training, the input image and the input prompt are at opposite ends. In addition, I suppose there's no transformation after the masking step before the patches are sent to the model for training or inference, but this is not immediately clear from the image. I'd maybe change the "x12" label to "repeat N times".

Did you explore using separate images for training and inference? I understand that having everything together in the same figure can be more comprehensive, but using separate ones might make it easier to understand the differences.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I thought that would be the case, no worries :) Picture + explanations is fine, I just needed a few minutes to parse everything in my head :)

During ***training***:

- input images are tokenized using a VQGAN to obtain image tokens

> - the image tokens are then masked according to a masking schedule.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- the image tokens are then masked according to a cosine masking schedule.
```

> - the masked tokens (conditioned on the prompt embeddings computed using a CLIP L/14 model) are passed to a U-ViT model that predicts the masked patches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the masked tokens (conditioned on the prompt embeddings computed using a CLIP L/14 model) are passed to a U-ViT model that predicts the masked tokens
```

> - the masked tokens (conditioned on the prompt embeddings computed using a CLIP L/14 model) are passed to a U-ViT model that predicts the masked patches

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- the masked tokens (conditioned on the prompt embeddings computed using a CLIP L/14 model) are passed to a [U-ViT](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.11093) model that predicts the masked patches
```

During ***inference***:

> - input prompt is embedded using the CLIP-L/14 text encoder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the input prompt is embedded using the CLIP-L/14 text encoder.
```

> - input prompt is embedded using the CLIP-L/14 text encoder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- input prompt is embedded using the [CLIP-L/14 text encoder](https://huggingface.co/openai/clip-vit-large-patch14).
```

> - iterate till N steps are reached:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- iterate till N steps (12, typically) are reached:
```

> - iterate till N steps are reached:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- iterate till `N` steps are reached:
```

    - start with randomly masked tokens and pass them to the U-ViT model along with the prompt embeddings

>     - predict the masked tokens and only keep a certain percentage of them based on the number of steps and mask schedule. Mask the remaining ones and pass them off to the U-ViT model

Reviewer 2: According to the figure, we are selecting the lowest probability ones for masking, is that the case?

>     - predict the masked tokens and only keep a certain percentage of them based on the number of steps and mask schedule. Mask the remaining ones and pass them off to the U-ViT model

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - predict the masked tokens and only keep a certain percentage of the most confident predictions based on the number of steps and mask schedule. Mask the remaining ones and pass them off to the U-ViT model
```

- pass the final output to the VQGAN decoder to obtain the final image

> As mentioned at the beginning, aMUSEd borrows a lot of similarities from MUSE, a text-to-image model from Google. However, there are some notable differences:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned at the beginning, aMUSEd borrows a lot of similarities from MUSE, but we made some notable different choices:
```

> As mentioned at the beginning, aMUSEd borrows a lot of similarities from MUSE, a text-to-image model from Google. However, there are some notable differences:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As mentioned at the beginning, aMUSEd borrows a lot of similarities from MUSE. However, there are some notable differences:
```

> - aMUSEd doesn’t follow a cascaded approach for predicting the masked patches, unlike MUSE.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- aMUSEd doesn’t follow a cascaded approach for predicting the masked patches.
```

Author: Done 1c6b6c1.

> - aMUSEd doesn’t follow a cascaded approach for predicting the masked patches, unlike MUSE.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- aMUSEd doesn’t follow two-stage approach for predicting the masked patches, unlike MUSE.
```

> - Instead of using T5 for text conditioning, CLIP L/14 is used for computing the text embeddings.

Reviewer 2: What version of T5 did they use, and why did we choose CLIP?

Author: More of a question for advanced readers IMO and for that they can refer to the paper. Briefly mentioning it here won't do much justice IMO.

> - Following Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), we provided additional conditioning to the U-ViT, referred to as “micro-conditioning”.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Following Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), we provide additional conditioning to the U-ViT, referred to as “micro-conditioning”.
```

> - Following Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), we provided additional conditioning to the U-ViT, referred to as “micro-conditioning”.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Following Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), additional conditioning, such as image size and cropping is passed to the U-ViT, referred to as “micro-conditioning”.
```

> To learn more about aMUSEd, we recommend reading the technical report here (TODO: link to the report). 

Reviewer 2: Reminder to update.

Author: When the link is available :D

## Using aMUSEd in 🧨 diffusers

aMUSEd comes fully integrated into 🧨 diffusers. To use it, we first need to install the libraries: 

```bash
pip install -U diffusers accelerate transformers -q
```

Let’s start with text-to-image generation:

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AmusedPipeline

pipe = AmusedPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "amused/amused-512", variant="fp16", torch_dtype=torch.float16
)

> pipe.vqvae.to(torch.float32)  # vqvae is producing nans in fp16

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pipe.vqvae.to(torch.float32)  # vqvae is kept in fp32 for stability
```

> pipe.vqvae.to(torch.float32)  # vqvae is producing nans in fp16

Reviewer 3: @patil-suraj is this really necessary?

pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

prompt = "cowboy"
image = pipe(prompt, generator=torch.manual_seed(8)).images[0]
image
```

> ![text2image_512.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/text2image_512.png)

Reviewer 2: This image is a bit underwhelming, as it's backlit. Can we maybe use one of the examples in the main grid posted above?

Author: I don't have the prompts that generated those images.

Author: Changed the image with a different prompt. 

@patil-suraj if you have better images, please pass along the hyperparameters and I can update.

We can study how `num_inference_steps` affects the quality of the images under a fixed seed:

```python
from diffusers.utils import make_image_grid 

images = []
for step in [5, 10, 15]:
    image = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=step, generator=torch.manual_seed(8)).images[0]
    images.append(image)

grid = make_image_grid(images, rows=1, cols=3)
grid
```

![image_grid_t2i_amused.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/image_grid_t2i_amused.png)

> Crucially, because of its small size (only ~600M parameters), aMUSEd is very fast. The figure below provides a comparative study of the inference latencies of different models, including aMUSEd:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Crucially, because of its small size (only ~600M parameters), aMUSEd is very fast. The figure below provides a comparative study of the inference latencies of different models, including aMUSEd:
```

@patil-suraj let's make sure we either include the text-encoder in the parameter count everywhere or not

<figure class="image text-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/amused_speed_comparison.png" alt="Speed Comparison">
  <figcaption>Tuples, besides the model names, have the following format: (timesteps, resolution). Benchmark conducted on A100. More details are in the technical report.</figcaption>
</figure>

> Tuples, besides the model names, have the following format: (timesteps, resolution). Benchmark conducted on A100. More details are in the technical report. 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Tuples, besides the model names, have the following format: (timesteps, resolution). Benchmark conducted on A100. More details are in the technical report. 

Reviewer 2: This is already in the caption.

As a direct byproduct of its pre-training objective, aMUSEd can do image inpainting zero-shot, unlike other models such as SDXL. 

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AmusedInpaintPipeline
from diffusers.utils import load_image
from PIL import Image

pipe = AmusedInpaintPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "amused/amused-512", variant="fp16", torch_dtype=torch.float16
)

> pipe.vqvae.to(torch.float32)  # vqvae is producing nans in fp16

Reviewer 3: Again a bit surprised that this is necessary cc @patil-suraj

Author: Might be worth studying which layers in the VQGAN are the culprit here.

pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

prompt = "a man with glasses"
input_image = (
    load_image(
        "https://huggingface.co/amused/amused-512/resolve/main/assets/inpainting_256_orig.png"
    )
    .resize((512, 512))
    .convert("RGB")
)
mask = (
    load_image(
        "https://huggingface.co/amused/amused-512/resolve/main/assets/inpainting_256_mask.png"
    )
    .resize((512, 512))
    .convert("L")
)   

image = pipe(prompt, input_image, mask, generator=torch.manual_seed(3)).images[0]
```

![inpainting_grid_amused.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/inpainting_grid_amused.png)

> aMUSEd is the first non-diffusion system within `diffusers`. We are excited to see how the community leverages it. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain that the iterative + scheduling approach made it a good candidate for integration, and masking is a type of noising.

Author: Done 1c6b6c1.

We encourage you to check out the technical report to learn about all the tasks we explored with aMUSEd. 

## Fine-tuning aMUSEd

> We provide a simple [training script](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/examples/amused/train_amused.py) for fine-tuning aMUSEd on custom datasets. With the 8-bit Adam optimizer and float16 precision, it’s possible to fine-tune aMUSEd with just under 11GBs of GPU VRAM. With LoRA, the memory requirements get further reduced to just 7GBs. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We provide a simple [training script](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/examples/amused/train_amused.py) for fine-tuning aMUSEd on custom datasets. With the 8-bit Adam optimizer and float16 precision, it's possible to fine-tune aMUSEd with just under 11GBs of GPU VRAM. With LoRA, the memory requirements get further reduced to just 7GBs. 
```

<figure class="image text-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/amused/finetuned_amused_result.png" alt="Fine-tuned result.">
  <figcaption>a pixel art character with square red glasses</figcaption>
</figure>

aMUSEd comes with an OpenRAIL license, and hence, it’s commercially friendly to adapt. Refer to [this directory](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/examples/amused) for more details on fine-tuning. 

## Limitations

> aMUSEd is not a state-of-the-art image generation system when the image quality is solely considered. We released aMUSEd to encourage the community to explore non-diffusion frameworks such as MIM for image generation. We believe MIM’s potential is underexplored, given its benefits:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
aMUSEd is not a state-of-the-art image generation regarding image quality. We released aMUSEd to encourage the community to explore non-diffusion frameworks such as MIM for image generation. We believe MIM’s potential is underexplored, given its benefits:
```

> aMUSEd is not a state-of-the-art image generation system when the image quality is solely considered. We released aMUSEd to encourage the community to explore non-diffusion frameworks such as MIM for image generation. We believe MIM’s potential is underexplored, given its benefits:

Reviewer 2: Also, MUSE is not available afaik.

Author: Made a note.

We hope that the community will find the resources useful and feel motivated to improve the state of MIM for image generation. 

## Resources

**Papers**:

- *[Muse:* Text-To-Image Generation via Masked Generative Transformers](https://muse-model.github.io/)
- aMUSEd: An Open MUSE Reproduction (TODO)
- [Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683) (T5)
- [Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020) (CLIP)
- [SDXL: Improving Latent Diffusion Models for High-Resolution Image Synthesis](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.01952)
- [Simple diffusion: End-to-end diffusion for high resolution images](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.11093) (U-ViT)
- [LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685)

**Code + misc**:

- [aMUSEd training code](https://github.com/huggingface/amused)
- [aMUSEd documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/amused)
- [aMUSEd fine-tuning code](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/examples/amused)

## Acknowledgements

> Suraj led training. William led data and supported training. Patrick von Platen supported both training and data and provided general guidance. Robin Rombach did the VQGAN training and provided general guidance. Also immense thanks to community-contributor Isamu Isozaki for helpful discussions and code-contributions.

Reviewer 2: Isamu is the main author, maybe we can use a different last sentence here? Maybe a quote from him? :)

Author: Updated :)
